### A Nuts and Bolt description

* The Internet
	* It is a computer network that interconnects billions of computing devices throughout the world.
  	* All of these devices are called hosts or end systems.

* End systems
	* End systems are connected together by a network of communication links and packet switches.
	* When one end system has data to send to another end system, the sending end system segments the data and adds header bytes to each segment.
	* The resulting packages of information, known as packets, are then sent through the network to the destination end system, where they are reassembled into the original data.

* Packet switches
  	* A packet switch takes a packet arriving on one of its incoming communication links and forwards that packet on one of its outgoing communication links.
  	* The two most prominent types of packet switches are routers and link-layer switches.
    	* Both types of switches forward packets toward their ultimate destinations.
    	* Link-layer switches are typically used in access networks
    	* Routers are typically used in the network core.
  	* The sequence of communication links and packet switches traversed by a packet from the sending end system to the receiving end system is known as a route or path through the network.

* ISPs
  	* End systems access the Internet through Internet Service Providers (ISPs),
  	* Each ISP is in itself a network of packet switches and communication links.
  	* As the Internet is all about connecting end systems to each other, so the ISPs that provide access to end systems must also be interconnected.
  	* Each ISP network is managed independently, runs the IP protocol, and conforms to certain naming and address conventions.
 
* Internet protocols and standards
  	* End systems, packet switches, and other pieces of the Internet run protocols that control the sending and receiving of information within the Internet.
  	* The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and the Internet Protocol (IP) are two of the most important protocols in the Internet.
    	* The TCP protocol specifies a reliable, ordered, and error-checked method for transmitting data packets between computers over a network.
    	* The IP protocol specifies the format of the packets that are sent and received among routers and end systems.
    	* The Internet’s principal protocols are collectively known as TCP/IP. 
 	 * Internet standards are developed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).
    	* The IETF standards documents are called requests for comments (RFCs).
    	* RFCs started out as general requests for comments to resolve network and protocol design problems that faced the precursor to the Internet.
    	* They define protocols such as TCP, IP, HTTP (for the Web), and SMTP (for e-mail).
  	* Other bodies also specify standards for network components, most notably for network links.
    	* The IEEE 802 LAN Standards Committee for example, specifies the Ethernet and wireless WiFi standards.

***

### A Services Description

* The Internet
  	* Can also be described from an entirely different angle—namely, as an  infrastructure that provides services to applications.
  	* In addition to traditional applications such as e-mail and Web surfing, Internet applications include mobile smartphone and tablet applications, including messaging, mapping with real-time road-traffic information, music streaming, movie and television streaming, online social media, video conferencing, multi-person games, and location-based recommendation systems.
  	* The applications are said to be distributed applications, since they involve multiple end systems that exchange data with each other.
  	* Importantly, Internet applications run on end systems—they do not run in the packet switches in the network core. Although packet switches facilitate the exchange of data among end systems, they are not concerned with the application that is the source or sink of data.

* How to run an application?
  	* As applications run on end systems, we need to write them in programs that run on the end systems, for example, Java, C, or Python.
  	* Now, as we are are developing a distributed Internet application, the programs running on the different end systems will need to send data to each other.
  	* End systems attached to the Internet provide a socket interface that specifies how a program running on one end system asks the Internet infrastructure to deliver data to a specific destination program running on another end system.
  	* This Internet socket interface is a set of rules that the sending program must follow so that the Internet can deliver the data to the destination program.

***

### What is a Protocol?

* Network Protocol
	* All activity in the Internet that involves two or more communicating remote entities is governed by a protocol. For eg:
		* Hardware-implemented protocols in two physically connected computers control the flow of bits on the “wire” between the two network interface cards.
		* Congestion-control protocols in end systems control the rate at which packets are transmitted between sender and receiver
		* Protocols in routers determine a packet’s path from source to destination.
	* Defination: A protocol defines the format and the order of messages exchanged between two or more communicating entities, as well as the actions taken on the transmission and/or receipt of a message or other event.
