### Packet Switching

* To send a message from a source end system to a destination end system, the source breaks long messages into smaller chunks of data known as packets.
* Between source and destination, each packet travels through communication links and packet switches (predominantly, routers and link-layer switches).
* Packets are transmitted over each communication link at a rate equal to the full transmission rate of the link. So, if a source end system or a packet switch is sending a packet of L bits over a link with transmission rate R bits/sec, then the time to transmit the packet is $\frac{L}{R}$ seconds.

###### Store-and-Forward Packet Switching

* Most packet switches use store-and-forward transmission.
* Store-and-forward transmission means that the packet switch must receive the entire packet before it can begin to transmit the first bit of the packet onto the outbound link.
* Ignoring delays caused by other factors, the transmission delay for sending one packet across a link using store-and-forward switching would be d<sub>trans</sub> = $\frac{L}{R}$.
* Therefore, the end-to-end transmission delay for sending one packet across N links (implying n-1 packet switches and 2 end systems) would be d<sub>trans</sub> = $\frac{NL}{R}$. 
* Finally, the end-to-end transmission delay for sending P packets across N links would be d<sub>trans</sub> = $\frac{(P+N-1) * L}{R}$.

###### Queuing Delays and Packet Loss

* Each packet switch has multiple links attached to it.
* For each attached link, the packet switch has an output buffer (also called an output queue), which stores packets that the router is about to send into that link.
* If an arriving packet needs to be transmitted onto a link but finds the link busy with the transmission of another packet, the arriving packet must wait in the output buffer.
* Thus, in addition to the store-and-forward delays, packets suffer output buffer queuing delays. These delays are variable and depend on the level of congestion in the network.
* In case the buffer is completely full when a packet arrives, packet loss will occur — either the arriving packet or one of the already-queued packets will be dropped.

###### Forwarding Tables and Routing Protocols

* 
