
###### Network Security
* The field of network security is about how someone can attack computer networks and how we can defend networks against those attacks, or better yet, design new architectures that are immune to such attacks in the first place.
* The following sections will discuss the more common types of attacks.

***

### 1. Types of Attacks

###### Malware in the End-system via the Internet
* Malware (malicious software) can enter and infect an end-system via the Internet.
* Once malware infects the device, it can do a lot of malicious activities like:
	* Deleting files 
 	* Installing spyware that collects private information
  	* Locking down the system for ransom
  	* Enroll the compromised host in a network of thousands of similarly compromised devices (collectively known as a botnet), which can be leveraged for spam e-mail distribution or distributed denial-of-service attacks against targeted hosts.
* Much of the malware out there today is self-replicating, which helps it spread exponentially fast.

###### Denial of Service - Attack on Servers and Network Infrastructure
* Another broad class of security threats are known as denial-of-service (DoS) attacks, which includes rendering a network, host, or other piece of infrastructure unusable by legitimate users.
* The site [Digital Attack Map](https://www.digitalattackmap.com/) helps visualize the top daily DoS attacks worldwide.
* Most Internet DoS attacks fall into one of three categories:
	* Vulnerability attack: A few well-crafted messages are sent to a vulnerable application or OS running on the targeted host, which can result in the service stopping or the host crashing.
 	* Bandwidth flooding: A deluge of packets are sent to the targeted host so that the target’s access link becomes clogged, preventing legitimate packets from reaching the server.
  	* Connection flooding: A large number of half-open or fully open TCP connections are established at the target host, rendering the host so bogged down with these bogus connections that it stops accepting legitimate connections.
* Distrubuted Denial of Service
	* A single attack source may not be able to generate enough traffic to harm the server.
 	* Furthermore, if all the traffic emanates from a single source, an upstream router may be able to detect the attack and block all traffic from that source before the traffic gets near the server.
  	* In a distributed DoS (DDoS) attack, the attacker controls multiple sources and has each source blast traffic at the target.
  	* With this approach, the aggregate traffic rate across all the controlled sources can to cripple the service and make it harder to pin down the endsystems that are part of the botnet. 

###### Packet Sniffing
* By placing a passive receiver in the vicinity of the wireless transmitter, one can obtain a copy of every packet that is transmitted via that transmiter/router.
* This passive receiver that records a copy of every packet that flies by is called a packet sniffer.
* It can be used to make intercept sensitive information, including passwords, card details, trade secrets, and private personal messages.
* Sniffers can be deployed in wired environments as well, such as in cable access technologies that broadcast packets and are thus vulnerable to sniffing.
* Packet-sniffing software is freely available at various Web sites and as commercial products (like Wireshark). 
* As packet sniffers are passive—that is, they do not inject packets into the channel—they are difficult to detect.
* Cryptography is one of the best defences against packet sniffing.

###### Masquerade As Someone Else - IP Spoofing
* The ability to inject packets into the Internet with a false source address is known as IP spoofing, and is but one of the ways in which one user can masquerade as another.
* It is surprisingly easy to create a packet with an arbitrary source address, packet content, and destination address and then transmit this hand-crafted packet into the Internet.
* To solve this problem, we need end-point authentication, that is, a mechanism that will allow us to determine with certainty if a message originates from where we think it does.

***
