### 1. The Development of Packet Switching: 1961–1972

* In the early 1960s, the telephone network was the world’s dominant communication network.
* It used circuit switching to transmit information from a sender to a receiver—an appropriate choice given that voice is transmitted at a constant rate.
* With increasing importance of computers and the advent of timeshared computers, the next question to hook computers together so that they could be shared among geographically distributed users.
* The traffic generated by such users was likely to be bursty.
* Three research groups around the world, each unaware of the others’ work began inventing packet switching as an efficient and robust alternative to circuit switching.
  	* In 1961, using queuing theory, Kleinrock (a student at MIT) demonstrated the effectiveness of the packet-switching approach for bursty traffic sources.
  	* In 1964, Paul Baran at the Rand Institute had begun investigating the use of packet switching for secure voice over military networks.
  	* At the National Physical Laboratory in England, Donald Davies and Roger Scantlebury were also developing their ideas on packet switching.
* The work at MIT, Rand, and the NPL laid the foundations for today’s Internet.
* J. C. R. Licklider and Lawrence Roberts, both colleagues of Kleinrock’s at MIT, went on to lead the computer science program at the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) in the United States, and eventually published an overall plan for the ARPAnet in 1967, the first packet-switched computer network and a direct ancestor of today’s public Internet.
* In 1969, the first packet switch was installed at UCLA under Kleinrock’s supervision.
* In 1969, the first host-to-host protocol between ARPAnet end systems, known as the network-control protocol (NCP) [RFC 001] was written.
* With an end-to-end protocol available, applications could now be written. Ray Tomlinson wrote the first e-mail program in 1972.
* By 1972, ARPAnet had grown to approximately 15 nodes and was given its first public demonstration by Robert Kahn.

***

### 2. Proprietary Networks and Internetworking: 1972–1980

* The initial ARPAnet was a single, closed network.
* In the early to mid-1970s, additional stand-alone packet-switching networks came into being
	* ALOHANet, a microwave network linking universities on the Hawaiian islands
 	* DARPA’s packet-satellite and packet-radio networks
  	* Telenet, a BBN commercial packet-switching network based on ARPAnet technology
  	* Cyclades, a French packet-switching network
  	* Time-sharing networks such as Tymnet and the GE Information Services network
  	* IBM’s SNA, which paralleled the ARPAnet work
* As the number of networks was growing, the time was ripe for developing an encompassing architecture for connecting networks together.
* Under the sponsorship of DARPA, work on interconnecting networks (and thereby creating a network of networks) was done by Vinton Cerf and Robert Kahn.
* These architectural principles were embodied in TCP.
	* The early versions of TCP combined a reliable in-sequence delivery of data via end-system retransmission (still part of today’s TCP) with forwarding functions (which today are performed by IP).
	* Early experimentation with TCP, combined with the recognition of the importance of an unreliable, non-flow-controlled, end-to-end transport service for applications such as packetized voice, led to the separation of IP out of TCP and the development of the UDP protocol.
 	* The three key Internet protocols that we see today—TCP, UDP, and IP—were conceptually in place by the end of the 1970s.

***

### 3. A Proliferation of Networks: 1980–1990

* By the end of the 1970s, approximately two hundred hosts were connected to the ARPAnet.
* By the end of the 1980s the number of hosts connected to the public Internet, a confederation of networks looking much like today’s Internet, would reach a hundred thousand.
* Much of that growth resulted from several distinct efforts to create computer networks linking universities together.
* January 1, 1983 saw the official deployment of TCP/IP as the new standard host protocol for ARPAnet (replacing the NCP protocol). The transition from NCP to TCP/IP was a flag day event—all hosts were required to transfer over to TCP/IP as of that day.
* In the late 1980s, important extensions were made to TCP to implement host-based congestion control, and the DNS was developed.
* Paralleling this development of the ARPAnet in the US, the French launched the Minitel project in early 1980s.
	* It was an ambitious plan to bring data networking into everyone’s home.
 	* Sponsored by the French government, the Minitel system consisted of a public packet-switched network, Minitel servers, and inexpensive terminals with built-in low-speed modems.
  	* The Minitel became a huge success in 1984 when the French government gave away a free Minitel terminal to each French household that wanted one.
  	* Minitel sites included free sites such as a telephone directory site, as well as private sites (which collected a usage-based fee from each user).
  	* The Minitel was in a large proportion of French homes 10 years before most Americans had ever heard of the Internet.

***

### 4. The Internet Explosion: The 1990s

* In the 1990s, ARPAnet, the progenitor of the Internet, ceased to exist, and soon, the Internet backbone traffic was being carried by commercial Internet Service Providers.
* The main event of the 1990s was to be the emergence of the World Wide Web application, which brought the Internet into the homes and businesses of millions
of people worldwide.
* The Web was invented at CERN by Tim Berners-Lee between 1989 and 1991, who developed initial versions of HTML, HTTP, a Web server, and a browser—the four key components of the Web.
* Around the end of 1993 there were about two hundred Web servers in operation.
* At about this time several researchers were developing Web browsers with GUI interfaces, including Marc Andreessen, who along with Jim Clark, formed Mosaic Communications, which later became Netscape, which was eventually open-sourced and led to the development of Firefox.
* The second half of the 1990s was a period of tremendous growth and innovation for the Internet, with major corporations and thousands of startups creating Internet products and services.
* During this period, hundreds of Internet startups made initial public offerings and started to be traded in a stock market, before they were even profitable.
* The Internet stocks collapsed in 2000–2001, and many startups shut down when the bubble burst.

***

### 5. The New Millennium

* The Internet, along with the networks that support it, have transformed life in the two decades of this millennium. Some notable changes are:
	* Aggressive deployment of broadband Internet access to homes. This high-speed Internet access has set the stage for a wealth of video applications, including the distribution of user-generated video, on-demand streaming of movies and television shows, and multiperson video conference.
 	* The increasing ubiquity of high-speed wireless Internet access. This high-speed wireless access has set the stage for the rapid emergence of hand-held computers, which enjoy constant and untethered access to the Internet.
  	* Online social networks have created massive people networks on top of the Internet, being used for messaging, posting, or media sharing.
  	* Online service providers, such as Google and Microsoft, have deployed their own extensive private networks. As a result, Google provides search results and e-mail access almost instantaneously.
  	* Many Internet commerce companies are now running their applications in the “cloud”—such as in Amazon’s AWS, Microsoft’s Azure, Google's GCP, or in the Alibaba Cloud. Cloud companies not only provide applications scalable computing and storage environments, but also provide the applications implicit access to their high-performance private networks.

***
