
###### Hostnames and IP addresses
* One identifier for an Internet host is its hostname, such as www.google.com, gaia.cs.umass.edu, www.wikipedia.org etc.
* Hostnames are mnemonic and are therefore appreciated by humans.
* However, hostnames provide little to no information about the location within the Internet of the host.
* Further, as hostnames can consist of variable-length alphanumeric characters, they would be difficult to process by routers.
* Hence, hosts are also identified by IP addresses (IPv4 and IPv6 addresses).
	* An IPv4 address consists of four bytes and has a rigid hierarchical structure.
 	* An IPv4 address looks like 121.7.106.83, where each period separates one of the bytes expressed in decimal notation from 0 to 255.
  	* An IP address is hierarchical because as we scan the address from left to right, we obtain more and more specific information about where the host is located in the Internet (that is, within which network, in the network of networks).

***

### 1. Services Provided by DNS

* The main task of the Internet’s domain name system (DNS) is to reconcile between humans-preferred hostnames and routers-preferred IP addresses.
* The DNS is:
	* A distributed database implemented in a hierarchy of DNS servers,
 	* An application-layer protocol that allows hosts to query the distributed database. 
* The DNS servers are often UNIX machines running the Berkeley Internet Name Domain (BIND) software.
* The DNS protocol usaully runs over UDP (and sometimes over TCP), and uses port 53.

###### Translating Hostnames to IP address
* DNS is commonly employed by other application-layer protocols, including HTTP and SMTP, to translate user-supplied hostnames to IP addresses.
* Following example illustrates the process of an HTML application calling DNS for IP resolution:
	* The browser (that is, an HTTP client), running on some user’s host, requests the URL.
 	* The same user machine runs the client side of the DNS application.
  	* The browser extracts the hostname from the URL and passes the hostname to the client side of the DNS application.
  	* The DNS client sends a query containing the hostname to a DNS server.
  	* The DNS client eventually receives a reply, which includes the IP address for the hostname.
  	* Once the browser receives the IP address from DNS, it can initiate a TCP connection to the HTTP/HTTPS server process located at port 80/443 at that IP address.
* Refer to [DNS - IP Lookup](https://github.com/violet-autumn/Computer-Networking/blob/main/Chapter%202/Additional%20texts.md#dns---ip-address-lookup) for a small exercise on DNS resolution.
* As we can see from the above example, DNS adds an additional delay to the Internet applications that use it.
* Fortunately, the desired IP address is often cached in a “nearby” DNS server, which helps to reduce DNS network traffic as well as the average DNS delay.

###### Host aliasing
* A host with a complicated hostname can have one or more alias names.
* For example, a hostname such as `relay1.west-coast.enterprise.com` could have, say, two aliases such as `enterprise.com` and `www.enterprise.com`.
* In this case, the hostname `relay1.west-coast.enterprise.com` is said to be a canonical hostname.
* Alias hostnames, when present, are typically more mnemonic than canonical hostnames.
* DNS can be invoked by an application to obtain the canonical hostname for a supplied alias hostname as well as the IP address of the host.

###### Mail server aliasing
* DNS can be invoked by a mail application to obtain the canonical hostname for a supplied alias hostname as well as the IP address of the host.
* In fact, the MX record permits a company’s mail server and Web server to have identical (aliased) hostnames; for example, a company’s Web server and mail server can both be called `enterprise.com`.

###### Load distribution
* DNS is also used to perform load distribution among replicated servers.
* Busy sites are often replicated over multiple servers, with each server running on a different end system and each having a different IP address.
* For replicated Web servers, a set of IP addresses is thus associated with one alias hostname.
* The DNS database contains this set of IP addresses.
* When clients make a DNS query for a name mapped to a set of addresses, the server responds with the entire set of IP addresses, but rotates the ordering of the addresses within each reply.
* As a client typically sends its HTTP request message to the IP address that is listed first in the set, DNS rotation distributes the traffic among the replicated servers.
* DNS rotation is also used for e-mail so that multiple mail servers can have the same alias name.
* Content distribution companies such as Akamai have used DNS in more sophisticated ways to provide Web content distribution.

***

### 2. Overview of How DNS Works
