### 1. P2P File Distrubution

###### Overview of P2P architecture
* The previous applications have thus far all employed client-server architectures with significant reliance on always-on infrastructure servers.
* With a P2P architecture, there is minimal (or no) reliance on always-on infrastructure servers.
* Instead, pairs of intermittently connected hosts, called peers, communicate directly with each other.
* The peers are not owned by a service provider, but are instead PCs, laptops, and smartpones controlled by users.
* In P2P file distribution, each peer can redistribute any portion of the file it has received to any other peers, thereby assisting the server in the distribution process.
* The most popular P2P file distribution protocol is BitTorrent.

###### Scalability of P2P Architectures
* Suppose a server and N peers are connected to the Internet.
* Denote the following:
	* Upload rate of the server’s access link by u<sub>s</sub>
 	* Upload rate of the i<sup>th</sup> peer’s access link by u<sub>i</sub>
  	* Download rate of the i<sup>th</sup> peer’s access link by d<sub>i<sub>.
  	* The size of the file to be distributed (in bits) by F.
* The distribution time is the time it takes to get a copy of the file to all N peers.
* Assume that the Internet core has abundant bandwidth, implying that all of the bottlenecks are in access networks.
* Distribution time for the client-server architecture:
	* The server must transmit one copy of the file to each of the N peers. Thus, the server must transmit NF bits. Since the server’s upload rate is u<sub>s</sub>, the time to distribute the file must be at least NF/u<sub>s</sub>.
 	* Let d<sub>min</sub> denote the download rate of the peer with the lowest download rate. The peer with the lowest download rate cannot obtain all F bits of the file in less than F/d<sub>min</sub> seconds.
  	* Putting these two together, Distibution time = max{NF/u<sub>s</sub>, F/d<sub>min</sub>}
  	* For large enough N, the client-server distribution time is given by NF/u<sub>s</sub>.
  	* Thus, the distribution time increases linearly with the number of peers N.
* Distribution time for the P2P architecture:
	* 
